This is a windows 7 application that will create a unique and randomized video out of images. The 
software will also use "text to voice" application to add audio to the video. The objective is to create 
unique videos with the same source content. 

How it works: 

1. The user defines: 
Part a. The CSV document that contains each file's name, and "text to voice" content. 
Part b. Folder which contains the source images (images that are used for the video) 
Part c. Folder for output videos 
Part d. Watermark text that will be displayed at the bottom of all videos (the user will be 
able to vary size and colour) 
Part e. Folder containing list of WAV audio files (music) to be played throughout the video 

Then the user clicks "start". 

2. The software now creates a WMV video as per below. 

Each CSV document from "Part a" will have two columns, such as below: 

Keyword                            Text to voice
Some targeted keyword              Here is text that will be converted to audio then published in the video. 

Each ROW will be for one video, and there may be 500 or so rows. The "Keyword" column tells us 
the file name for each video. In my example, the output video file will be "Some targeted 
keyword.wmv". 

The "text to voice" content will be converted to voice. It will typically be 1000 words for each video.
For this you can use free text to speech code from  http://www.codeproject.com/Articles/182881/Text-to-Speech

To create the actual video itself, the images will be randomized, and will each appear for random 
durations between 5 - 15 seconds. But they must NOT be still images. There must always be 
movement. The videos must use as many different effects as possible so that youtube will not 
consider them the same images just mixed around with effects. This is the main core of the 
application, and we need more than just simple transitions between images like a slideshow.

Notes about the created video: 

• It is up to you how you want to use the images to create the video, but some of the effects I 
had in mind are: 
1. Panning and zooming in on images 
2. Rotating of images 
3. Multiple images at the same time being in the video and zooming in/out 
4. Changing of colours 
5. Blurring 

The idea is to create a video that partially resembles the original image, but will be different enough 
so that youtube considers it a unique video at any point in the video. 

So if we had 5 source images, we could create 20 x 60 second videos and they'll all be very different. 

• The length of the video is determined by the length of the text to speech audio file. Again 
the text to speech engine is free source code. The main component of this application is the 
manipulation of images to create a unique video from the same source content. 
