During the summer of tenth grade I took a number theory course at Johns Hopkins University with students from Alaska California and Bogota Colombia.
Similarly during the summer following eleventh grade I was one of ninety students from New Jersey selected to attend the Governor's School in the Sciences at Drew University.
At Drew I took courses in molecular orbital theory special relativity cognitive psychology and I participated in an astrophysics research project.
For my independent research project I used a telescope to find the angular velocity of Pluto.
With the angular velocity determined I used Einstein's field equations and Kepler's laws to place an upper bound on the magnitude of the cosmological constant which describes the curvature of space and the rate of the universes expansion.
In addition to learning science I recently lectured physics classes on special relativity at the request of my physics teacher.
After lecturing one class for 45 minutes one student bought many books on both general and special relativity to read during his study hall.
Inspiring other students to search for knowledge kindles my own quest to understand the world and the people around me.
Inherent in any research writing spree is a certain amount of mental exhaustion that follows.
One would think that our essay creators would want nothing more to do with any particular document once it has been completed.
And while such may be true of other so-called custom essay assistance services, it certainly is not the case with EssayPage!
Taking pride in our work means that we must be committed to guaranteeing every page of every essay produced by everyone who writes for us!
Consequently, EssayPage pledges that no job is finished until we have found research that adheres tutorially to the specifics of your request.
The political challenge posed to President Bush by the deadly helicopter attack in Iraq on Sunday is this: how to keep public opinion from swinging against him over Iraq while not abandoning his quest to bring a stable democracy to that country.
Americans have been dying for months in Iraq attacked by an enemy whose nature remains murky.
But the downing of the Chinook helicopter which killed sixteen soldiers brought the insurgency to a new level and suggested its growing effectiveness. 
Up to now the American people in their majority have backed the Iraq campaign and the Bush administration has vowed repeatedly to stay the course even through an election year.
As Margaret Okayo of Kenya traversed the humpbacked span of the Queensboro Bridge crossing into Manhattan she reached at Mile sixteen the most alluring and dangerous point on the New York City Marathon course.
The crowds along First Avenue are loud and assuring but ten miles remain in the race. Many a runner has fallen victim to this siren song of encouragement picking up speed too soon only to grow exhausted before the finish.
Times like these were made for taster's choice.